19 and 30, no 19 and 20, I believe, my father became a
member of the Texas A&M University staff.
And what was his position in the university? He was
first a county agent in the extension service and
before he retired he became director of the
extension service. Okay, and where had you lived
previously before, or where had they lived
previously before they came here? In northeast
Texas. In northeast Texas. I see.
Okay. Could you give me your earliest
recollections of the community, in other words,
here in Bryan, what it looked like, how it was, you
know, the landscape and the buildings and so on?
Well, it was a very pleasant, small town where...
Everybody knew everybody else, where everybody
knew where everybody lives. Nobody ever paid
attention to the names of the streets, they just
said so and so lives three blocks on the other side
of such and such a place. We had Allen Academy, it
was called then, it's now called Allen School, and
everybody was interested in the welfare of the
boys there, and the students at A&M University,
which was called A&M College at that time. Could
you tell me a little bit about how large the
community was at the time? Between 5,000 and 6,000
people. Could
you tell me a little bit about your school years,
where you went to school and what the schooling was
like then as compared to today? You mean a school
here in Bryan? Right. Yes. We had one high school,
and I believe we only had two elementary schools at
that time. The elementary school was over on the
west side of town, which was the old part of Bryan,
and the other one was over here. We had only one high
school. It was not anything like junior high,
middle high and all, senior high and all that. It
was just high school. Right. And it was four years.
It was twelve, twelve grades then of school.
Twelve grades. Right. Okay.
Did, was it, were there very many in the school at,
you know, when you went, where you were going or?
Well,
not a great many. I don't think we ever had more than
thirty. But you didn't have, you had, in other
words, a teacher for each grade and so on too? Yes.
For all the classes, right?
Did they, you also told me, or I know now that you are
a librarian, how did you happen to choose this
career? It's just what I always wanted to do. When I
was 14 years old, I started working over in the old
Carnegie Library building. From that moment, I
knew that's what I wanted to do. Right. Okay. Could
you relate a little bit of the history of the Bryan
Library here, how it was established? Yes. When
Bryan was first came into being, it was a pretty
rough town. It was completely a town where an awful
lot of people who didn't have any other place to go
came. Roughnecks, wanderers, people who'd been
kicked out of other places. There was actually a
saloon on every corner. Hangings and lynchings
and shootings were the rule of the day. But there
also came into this community number of very
cultivated people who had come from the Old South.
They were people not only of wealth and influence,
but people who knew what to do with it. And
prominent among these were some ladies who
established what they called the Mutual
Improvement Club. This was in 1897. The Mutual
Improvement Club is now the most prestigious club
in Bryan, which is the Bryan Women's Club. And
among these ladies were Mrs. Alastair Waldrop
Sr.,
and Mrs. Rose Fountain Howell, and Mrs. George
Brandon. And these ladies felt that Brian needed a
number of things. There were over 4,000 people.
There were almost 5,000 people in Brazos County at
that time. And they decided that they were going to
do something about the situation. Well, they had
several goals which they put down. One of them was
to get the cows off of Main Street. And another was
to have a park. And the park, I may tell you, is this
park right here where the library is at the moment.
And the third thing they wanted to do was to have a
free public library. And I may tell you in the
beginning that in a very short while, just a matter
of months, they had done all these things that they
wanted to do. They pretty quick got the cattle off
of Main Street. They took this piece of land and
made it into a park, and they planted those oak
trees. No, I think the oak trees were planted
later, sometime after World War I as a memorial to
the men in Brazos County who had been killed in the
war. And then as for the library, these ladies,
having their ears to the ground, heard that Andrew
Carnegie was giving away millions of dollars
establish libraries. This is really the most
wonderful thing that ever happened for libraries
in the United States. So Mrs., I
think it was Mrs. Brandon who had some connection
with Andrew Carnegie, and they wrote to Mr.
Carnegie and told him that they would like to have a
library in Bryan, and they pointed out all the
reasons why they needed a library in Bryan. he
wrote back immediately and said he would be
pleased that was the word he used to give them a
thousand dollars which they would use this money
to build the building and that's what that
building cost one thousand dollars under these
terms that they the city would match this fund
every year a thousand dollars to buy books to run
the library, pay personnel. So the thing was
accepted. And an interesting thing is to go there
and look at the minutes of the city council in those
years. And you find that many years they had to
borrow money to keep their side of the bargain. But
they did. So in 1903, on December the 14th, this
library over here opened. It was the biggest day in
Bryan's history up to that point. You can go back
and read the Old Eagle and find out where everybody
was on that day and what they were doing. And if they
were not attending the library opening, well, you
knew exactly why they couldn't. The way they got
the books has always been interesting to me. Miss
Malcolm McInnis, who was one of my high school
teacher's father was on the faculty. He was on the
first faculty at A&M. And he was also the first
president of the library board, the old Carnegie
building. And he lived over in one of those
gorgeous Victorian mansions over on 29th Street.
They tore it down now and made apartments out of it.
I'm sorry to say. But he invited everybody in
Brazos County to come to a party at his house. But to
come to the party, you had to bring a book. So they
all brought a book, and Miss Malcolm said that she
remembers it. She said it was just like heaven
descending upon earth to have all those books. And
she used to sit for hours at the piano supposedly
practicing, and all the while she had one of the
books. And she just lived in fear that she wouldn't
get all the books read before they took them out of
the house and put them in the library. Well, over
the years, of course, you know, the library's
grown and grown and grown. We do have some of those
original books in the collection now. You can go
down and see that wonderful little handwriting on
the cards that we still have. Books are still
there. This library, I just arranged it so that
when this library opened, I had it open on December
the 14th. That's great. How long was the original
building of the library here before it was
reconstructed? You mean the building over there?
Let's see, was the first library on this property
here? No, the first library was the old one over
here that's still there. Oh, I see. Okay. It's been
there since 1903. Since 1903. And when was this
building built here? Well, let me see. Maybe five,
six years ago. Five or six years ago. OK. 1969, I
believe, is when we opened, in December 1969. OK.
You told me that you wanted to be a librarian. Where
did you get your schooling? Well, I have a BA and an
MA from the University of Texas at Austin, and I
have an MS in Library Science from Louisiana State
University.
Do you know approximately how many volumes they
had here in the library when they started out as
compared to today? You mean the first library
collection? I think it was a thousand books. Now we
have 100,000. 100,000. That's
great. Of course, I guess the Depression hit here
as much as it did anywhere else in the United
States. Could you describe how it affected your
life or your lifestyle and maybe the people here in
Vine?
Well, as I remember, People here in Brown were not
greatly affected by the Depression because their
economy at that time depended upon the
university.
Life went all about as usual. Only thing I can
remember about the Depression from my university
days was that they kept having these Saturdays
when you could go to the movies free. And we would
all spend all day Saturday going to every movie
house in Austin. Free movies.
What changes in this community do you think have
most affected its advancement and growth?
People all over the country are finding that this
is an extremely pleasant place to live. And there
are just thousands of people who come into this
community to live for no other reason than just
that. The life is about as leisurely as it can be in
these days. The people are kind, hospitable, and
congenial. And of course, it is a college town.
There's no getting away that I think for myself and
for a lot of people that the pleasantest kind of
place to live is a university town. I've never
lived in any other, so I don't really know how it
would be. Right. What recollections do you have of
Texas A&M University as it grew over the years? Oh
my. Or just a view of them in a way that's
interesting? Well, from the time I first laid eyes
on it, I remembered how it was, the university was
founded, and it always amazed me to think that of
all places in the world, now this is nothing but a
little flat prairie out there. that this should be
the first land-grant college in the United
States, which it is. And it started out as with a few
buildings, and Miss Malcolm told me also one time
about how he had just married this beautiful,
exquisite little dainty Mississippi belle and
brought her to A&M. The train was late, so
President Gathright had sent horse and buggy to
pick them up and they got there, the train went
there, so they went back. So when they came to get
off, he stepped down and then he held out his hand
and let her step down and she put her lovely little
foot right into a big mud hole. And she lifted up her
skirts and she looked around in amazement. She
couldn't see anything except miles and miles of
prairie. And she said, Major McInnes, where is the
university?
What kinds of fads and fashions were popular when
you were growing up? Well, I can tell you that the
main recreation for young people in this town was
riding up and down Main Street. There was nothing
to do except go to the movies. And it was only—well,
there were three movie houses. Which ones were
those? Do you recall? Oh, the Palace, the Queen,
and the Dixie. The Dixie was where they had
westerns.
We had the second one that was at the Queen, and the
first ones were at the Palace. Were the roads paved
in this town at that time? Yes, but they had not
always been. Mrs. Donna Carnage was telling me
about the first paved street they got in Bryan was
Main Street, and she said that on that day, it was on
a Saturday morning, and her brother Walter
Coulter. They elected a queen of the paving, can
you believe it? A queen of the paving. And that was
Frances James, she became. Karen's own of Jim
Ferguson, and always went wherever he could to
hear him, because he thought it was, of course, he
knew as a renegade and all those things, but he was
spectacular. eloquent oratory was interesting.
Who exactly was Jim Ferguson? Was he a mayor here?
No, no. He was governor of Texas twice, and he was
impeached. He was, I guess, the only Texas
governor who's ever been impeached. I know he was.
So then he stepped right in and ran his wife for
governor, and she used to call them all Ferguson,
and she
got elected.
What natural disasters that occurred in this area
do you remember, and how did they affect the people
in the landscape?
Well, there were several hurricanes. One of them I
remember after I came here to be director of this
library, and I know that all the refugees that
lived in the library during that time. Oh, that was
about 1969. Not 1969. More like 59, I think. Right.
Were there any floods back in the earlier days,
like in the Browns River that occurred, you know,
during your time? Yes, long before my time,
though.
What role has religion played in this community,
and how has it changed over the years? Every
account that you read of the history of this area is
that the churches and schools were in this town
before the town was, right? The oldest churches in
town, the Episcopal Church, the Baptist Church,
Methodist, Presbyterian, and the Catholic
Church. and the Christian Church. I think those
are the ones that were first here, and they were all
established about the same time. When was that
approximately?
1867.
Okay. And over the years, you know, we've got many
churches now. The Baptists have split into many,
many sects. Just all you have to do on Sunday
morning is try to go to church yourself, to get
through the parked cars to get to your own church.
Right.
Do you think there were more people at that
time—well, I don't know, maybe that's not a
question to answer—that were more involved in
religion and religious activities, possibly,
than there are today? Yes, because—for this
reason. Church was not only for church, but it was
also for social. In the early days, the only social
life people had was in the church. What kind of
social activities were there? Well, singing,
sacred heart singing,
socials, and what they used to call dinner on the
ground, meeting all day, dinner on the ground. In
those that dance, there are some churches, you
know, that dance, and others that don't, but
dancing, the Episcopal Catholic Church for young
people dances.
What technological changes do you think have had
the greatest impact on this area?
I don't know, such as what? Well, like,
I don't know, it could be like, such as, I don't
know, maybe farm machinery or the... Well, of
course, farm machinery. This is basically a
ranching and... plantation area and has always
been, but machinery that had to do with any of those
occupations would have a great impact
upon us. Most people, of course, I guess, were
involved in agriculture during that time, right?
That's all there was to do. Kids' stores. Do you
know what the main crops were that were grown in
this area? Cotton. This is one of the biggest
cotton planting areas in the world. The Brazos
Valley is supposed to be the richest, second maybe
to
Egypt. Do you think agriculture is still as
important to this area as it was? Well, it's not as
important as it was, but it's still certainly very
important.
How do you feel that—that Bryan or the community
has—how has it most affected your life here? I
don't know exactly. Let's see.
or what attributes maybe of this community do you
feel are important to you? I adore every inch of
this town. I would never live anywhere else. You'd
have to put me in jail to take me away from this town.
Could you tell me something a little bit about the
stores and the retail businesses here in town,
some that were
quite progressive or quite prominent here in
Newtown? Well, Waldrop's has always been here,
just the Brown Brand store has just gone out of
business. They still have one at the college, and
Eugene Edge on the corner is still here. Conway is
an old store. Were these—are these department
stores, or are these—? Waldrop's and Conway's are
men's clothing stores, and Edge's is just that
old—it's the only one in town—just an
old-fashioned store where you can get
everything, any way of clothing.
Okay. Do you think that the growth of Bryan has had
any negative aspects on the community? No. I think
it's too big. It makes me unhappy that I don't know
where everybody lives.
You probably maybe have some friends or relatives
that have lived here that have maybe moved out of
this community. Is there any particular reason or
one maybe general reason they've moved? from this
area. I think that the main reason people move from
Bryan is that they find, they think they will be, it
would be more advantageous to them, usually in the
way of money, to go somewhere else. I've never
known but one person in all the years that I've
lived in Bryan, that's a long time, who did not like
it here, and who said so. This was a person from the
cold Middle West. I see. And I may say they have now
gone back to the cold middle class. But I've known
many, many, many converted Yankees. We love it.
Have, and I'm sure I guess a number of people have
gone just because maybe the bigger towns have had
more attraction? Yes. They, you know, in earlier
days when the educational advantages weren't as
great as they are here, they leave it other places
to educate their
children. Okay.
Of course, let's see. housing I'm sure in the
earlier days was quite different than it is now.
They didn't use brick materials and so on to build
houses. How do you think, what were the styles
like, you know, then as compared to today? In
architecture? Well, the favorite kinds of
architecture here were
Greek Revival, which is plantation style, and
Victorian. We have several excellent examples of
both of
them. Okay. And they were, of course, the wooden
frame, right? Two-story, mostly, weren't they?
Yeah. The Aston brothers, who came here from
Alabama to plant cotton, built two gorgeous brick
houses, one on the inside of town, one over on Texas
Avenue burned 50 years ago. And the other one is
still, and it is a magnificent house. It's just
been bought by somebody with a large family, I'm
happy to say. It's over on the west side. When were
those built in this area? Oh, long towards the turn
of the century, after they had made their fortunes
in cotton. Okay. Um, how do you, what do you feel is,
uh, about the impact of the railroad in this area,
as far as the transportation. Was it an important
link to other towns and communities? Well, there
had never been Brown except for the railroad. The
railroad left Milliken and came to Brown, and that
was when the town came into existence. Do you know
when it, where was that? Well, let's see. It was in
1967. 1967. Was it used a lot by the people here in
Bryan to get to different communities
everywhere? Totally, yeah. That was the only mode
of transportation.
Right, yeah. Okay. You told me earlier there was a
lot of renegades and saloons in this area. what
was when
how long ago was that that was in the 1800s that
was when in the earlier earlier days um There have
been, I believe, a lot of different ethnic
backgrounds of peoples that have moved in the
series. Yes, very happily. I
always get this question, and I like to say I'm
proud of the fact that this community has always
been integrated. This library has always been
integrated. When the problem of using the library
came, you know, whether black people could use the
library, they had always been using the library.
Had all the same privileges as anybody else. The
Mexican-Americans have been a great influence on
this, you know, to have given it that leisurely,
graceful, and colorful influence that only they
could give. We have
a large bohemian Were
these different ethnic people, were they here
when you were living here also? Yes, they've
always been here. There's also a larger number of
Italians in this community.
There's a large number of Italians.
What were the, what was the A&M University like
when you were growing up? Was there, of course,
most, it was all male school at that time, and most,
I guess all the men were in the corps, is that
correct? Yes. Emphasis was definitely on the
military. Right. And it was the most exciting
place in the world for a girl to be. That was the
other occupation, I may tell you, of young people
was for girls to get in cars and go out to A&M and See
the boys.
How did—let's
see—were there any particular—well,
let's see, what—I
was trying to think.
You
said that your father was at A&M.
Was your mother the housewife then, I guess,
right? My mother definitely objected to that
terminology. Oh, she did? She was not a housewife.
Oh, okay.